imagine you're at a football game when
this obnoxious guy sits next to you he's
loud he spills his drink on you and he
makes fun of your team days later you're
walking in the park when suddenly it
starts to pour rain who should show up
at your side to offer you an umbrella
the same guy from the football game do
you change your mind about him based on
this second encounter or do you go with
your first impression and write him off
research in social psychology suggests
that were quick to form lasting
impressions of others based on their
behaviors we managed to do this with
little effort inferring stable character
traits from a single behavior like a
harsh word or a clumsy step using our
impressions as guides we can accurately
predict how people are going to behave
in the future armed with the knowledge
the guy from the football game was a
jerk the first time you met him you
might expect more of the same down the
road if so you might choose to avoid him
the next time you see him that said we
can change our impressions in light of
new information behavioral researchers
have identified consistent patterns that
seem to guide this process of impression
updating on one hand learning very
negative highly immoral information
about someone typically has a stronger
impact than learning very positive
highly moral information so
unfortunately for our new friend from
the football game his bad behavior at
the game might outweigh his good
behavior at the park research suggests
that this bias occurs because immoral
behaviors are more diagnostic or
revealing of a person's true character
okay so by this logic bad is always
stronger than good when it comes to
updating well not necessarily certain
types of learning don't seem to lead to
this sort of negativity bias when
learning about another person's
abilities and competencies for instance
this bias flips it's actually the
positive information that gets weighted
more heavily let's go back to that
football game if a player scores a goal
it ultimately has a stronger impact on
your impression of their skills than if
they miss the net the two sides of the
updating story are ultimately quite
consistent over all behaviors that are
perceived as being less frequent are all
so the ones that people tend to weigh
more heavily when forming and updating
impressions highly immoral actions and
highly competent actions so what's
happening at the level of the brain when
we're updating our impressions using
fMRI or functional magnetic resonance
imaging researchers have identified an
extended network of brain regions that
respond to new information that's
inconsistent with initial impressions
these include areas typically associated
with social cognition attention and
cognitive control moreover when updating
impressions based on people's behaviors
activity in the ventral lateral
prefrontal cortex and the superior
temporal sulcus correlates with
perceptions of how frequently those
behaviors occur in daily life in other
words the brain seems to be tracking
low-level statistical properties of
behavior in order to make complex
decisions regarding other people's
character it needs to decide is this
person's behavior typical or is it out
of the ordinary in the situation with
the obnoxious football fan turned Good
Samaritan your brain says well in my
experience pretty much anyone would lend
someone their umbrella but the way this
guy acted at the football game that was
unusual and so you decide to go with
your first impression there's a good
moral in this data your brain and by
extension you might care more about the
very negative immoral things another
person has done compared to the very
positive moral things but it's a direct
result of the comparative rarity of
those bad behaviors we're more used to
people being basically good like taking
time to help a stranger in need in this
context bad might be stronger than good
but only because good is more plentiful
think about the last time you judge
someone based on their behavior
especially a time when you really feel
like you changed your mind about someone
was the behavior that caused you to
update your impression something you'd
expect anyone to do or was it something
totally out of the ordinary
you